What is PNR number?
PNR (passenger name record) number in Indian railways ticket is a 10 digit number (a combination of 3 and 7 digits).
A typical PNR number is like  214-1215305.


The PNR – Passenger Name Record: It’s Meaning And Status In Journey

In the airline and travel industries, a passenger name record (PNR) is a record in the database of a computer reservation system (CRS) that has the itinerary for a passenger, or a group of passengers travelling together.
The concept of a PNR was first introduced by airlines that needed to exchange reservation information in case passengers required flights of multiple airlines to reach their destination (‘interlining’).

Talking in the context of Indian Railways, PNR number is a unique pointer to a record in the railway database.
The record pointed by PNR contains comprehensive journey details.

The details may include:
Passenger Details (Name, Age, Sex, Birth Preference)
Ticket Details (Train No, Date, From, To, Boarding Station, Reservation Upto, Class, Birth, Quota)
Transaction / Payment Details (Transaction ID, Payment Mode, Ticket Charge)


First 3 Digits
They tell us from which PRS the ticket has been booked.
(PRS: Passenger Reservation System. Developed by CRIS, PRS is a total networking solution to Indian
Railways Passenger Reservation System.)

The PNR numbers’ starting digit does not depend on the PRS from which it has been booked.
It depends upon: Zone of the Train, w.r.t. starting station of the train.

Number	Code	Zone
1	SCR	Secunderabad PRS
2, 3	NR, NCR, NWR, NER	New Delhi PRS
4, 5	SR, SWR, SCR	Chennai PRS
6, 7	NFR, ECR, ER, ECoR, SER, SECR	Calcutta PRS
8, 9	CR, WCR, WR	Mumbai PRS

e.g. If a ticket is booked in Rajdhani Express (Mumbai to New Delhi), as the starting station is Mumbai, PNR will start from 8.
The subsequent 2 digits detail specific PRS in the zone.
e.g. If you book from Dadar PRS center, it can be 57 (For an example only). For Ahmedabad, it may be 24.
To sum up, if the first 3 digits are 824, then it says that the zone is either CR, WCR or WR and the PRS center is Ahmedabad.

Last 7 Digits
They are randomly generated numbers using the Rand() function. They represent no information about the ticket or journey. This is done to make the PNR number unique.
One can check status of PNR number of http://www.indianrail.gov.in website. Also at every major stations, PNR stats checking counters are available.
Passanger name record number lasts minimum 9 month as the TDR filed can take maximum of 9 months. It then flushed out from the database.
(Normally) The digits of PNR become meaningless. However, PNR details may not be available for the general public once the journey gets over for privacy and security concerns of passengers

What do you mean by RAC?
A Reservation Against Cancellation (RAC) is technically a train ticket with confirmed seat but wait listed berth.
In other words, if your train ticket shows RAC as its status (with an RAC status number),
you can board the train and occupy the seat allowed, instead of a sleeping berth at night
A berth is split into 2 seats for 2 RAC ticket holders.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


